# Memorial Remarks, July 29, 2017

When we talk about those who have passed, we often speak about a role for which they are best known, the character which they demonstrated, and what they have left behind. For Charlotte, this proves inadequate. This convention cannot contain my Grandma Kelly.

Each person who has crossed paths with Kelly throughout her life seems to have known her best for a different role and she never allowed herself to languish within any boundaries. Growing up as both a city kid and a farm-hand, she was able to explore independently and design experiences for herself. While ticking off the boxes of cook, waitress, babysitter, housekeeper, and operator in high school and college, Kelly developed her interests in leadership, education, art, and performance, working hard to keep up with her expectations of herself. 

Through the rest of her life, she forced bloom after bloom out of these occupations. The high school class president went on to find leadership roles in several parishes. Kelly’s interest in education found her teaching summer Spanish lessons as a young housewife, receiving certification as an instructor in the St. Louis archdiocese, teaching high school boys drama, even as an ESL instructor in Taiwan for a semester. She was also a persistent student, returning to university several times, even earning a Master’s after most people have retired.

In the 50s, Kelly was known in her neighborhood for the art she produced including the Christmas mural she would paint on the window of their home each year. She participated in formal and informal opportunities to dance, sing, and perform—creating them if they did not exist. Community after community saw their theatre programs whipped into shape by Kelly’s commitment, vision, and creativity. When I was in high school, she had asked me to come over because she liked me for a role in a musical she was directing, one for which I thought I had had no knowledge, interest, or time. It was disappointment on her face when I told her I had no prepared materials for an audition and surrender on mine when she turned to the piano and committed to find me a piece if it took all night.

In the rehearsals ( I got the part ), there was not much focus on acting. Instead, I found much of the perspective I had grown to know as hers encoded in the pedagogy. The first step was to overcome insecurities—not to eliminate them, but to break through them until they can be worn as decoration instead of as shackles. Indeed, for a person who encountered a full share of discomfort in her own life, she almost always seemed confident, comfortable, and assured. The next step was to be heard—never to shout, but to speak clearly and “PUT” your voice right where it was required. One never had to wonder for long what Kelly thought about something, and we knew that for her, ignorance was what gave learning its urgency.

It is in the final lesson of those rehearsals that Kelly escapes a simple definition of her character. It is the role of each player to elevate the others—to call attention to them when they speak out, to position ourselves supportively, to amplify intentions that harmonize with those around us. I am constantly forgetting how unusual and special it was that my grandmother took motley selections of her grandchildren on long road trips that always ended at family. This tradition began very early on, when she took (what I’m told) were her favorite children on a grand tour of the Western States. Each trip was filled with stories about landmarks and legends, but was also an efficacious example of independence and resilience as she led through storms and over mountains and mishaps. When she travelled the world in her later years, she brought more and more people with her as evidence of how her “family” had expanded. Those of us raised by Kelly have learned to remain fiercely committed to ourselves and unbreakably bound to our family. Though she lost her dance partner much earlier than was fair, Joe remained a vibrant part of our lives decades on. Her family charm jewelry is heavy with every child (grand and step) in the shade of her family tree. Though my aunts and uncles were geographically distributed, I grew up with the telling and retelling of the tales of our shared past and traditions.

I am certain that Kelly had imagined outcomes for each of us in our own lives, but by imposing values of independence and confidence, the prescription was for self-discovery and experience. “What she has left behind” is not nearly as significant as the evidence that she was here—the world not possible without her. Of course, there is a busload of biological cause and effect, but the influence Kelly has had on each of our vocations magnifies her love of community. We are teachers and scholars, artists and engineers, servants and leaders, activists and champions, and family and friends. In speaking about Kelly, I must include all of us. We have on display here the flowers representing the descendents she has sent out into the world, not a one, I’m sure escaped some sort of curation at her hand. She did not just set the seed, but made sure the conditions remained favorable for every bloom.

As Kelly was dying, her cabin began buzzing with family and friends. Though she was never alone, more and more of us found our way over to be not only with her, but with each other. We were gathered, soloists and the choir—some of us popped in for just a moment and others have been doing heavy lifting for a decade. Altogether now. It was perfect.

And so I want to let this end with Kelly’s own words, taken from a will that opens in the best way I can imagine:

> “To these seven children, I leave my whole-hearted love. These are the finest, most gratifying children a mother ever bore. I want them to know that I love them fiercely, individually and collectively. I wish them joy in this life and spiritual comfort at my passing. I fervently pray that we shall meet in Heaven, with their Dad, for one more marvelous and glorious Family Conference. I bless them and their mates and their children. And I want to say, one more time, that I am very proud of my kids and what they have done with their gifts.”
<script async src="//genius.codes"></script>
<style>
#view-on-github {
    display:none;
}
</style>